I.
II.
III.
IV.
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 Release No. 46880 / November 21, 2002
Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Release No. 1672 / November 21, 2002
Administrative Proceeding File No. 3-10947
In the Matter of   BDO International, Minas Ioannou, and Christakis Ioannou; Respondents  

: : : : : : : : :
The Securities and Exchange Commission ("Commission") deems it appropriate and in the public interest that public administrative proceedings be, and hereby are, instituted against BDO International, Minas Ioannou, and Christakis Ioannou (collectively "Respondents") pursuant to Rule 102(e)(3) of the Commission's Rules of Practice.1
In anticipation of the institution of these proceedings, Respondents have submitted Offers of Settlement (the "Offers") which the Commission has determined to accept. Solely for the purpose of these proceedings and any other proceedings brought by or on behalf of the Commission, or to which the Commission is a party, prior to a hearing pursuant to the Commission's Rules of Practice, 17 C.F.R. § 201.1 et seq., and without admitting or denying the findings herein, except as to the Commission's jurisdiction over them, the subject matter of these proceedings, and the findings contained in Section III subsection (3) below, which are admitted, Respondents consent to the entry of this Order Instituting Public Administrative Proceedings Pursuant to Rule 102(e) of the Commission's Rules of Practice, Making Findings, and Imposing Remedial Sanctions ("Order"), as set forth below.
On the basis of this Order and Respondents' Offers, the Commission finds that:
In view of the foregoing, the Commission deems it appropriate and in the public interest to impose the sanction specified in Respondents' Offers.
Accordingly, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, that:
BDO International of Nicosia, Cyprus, Minas Ioannou, and Christakis Ioannou are suspended from appearing or practicing before the Commission as accountants.
By the Commission.
 
Jonathan G. Katz Secretary
http://www.sec.gov/litigation/admin/34-46880.htm
