Litigation Release No. 17954 / January 29, 2003 Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Release No. 1709 / January 29, 2003
Securities and Exchange Commission v. KPMG LLP, Joseph T. Boyle, Michael A. Conway, Anthony P. Dolanski and Ronald A. Safran, Civil Action No. 03 CV 0671 (DLC) (S.D.N.Y.) (January 29, 2003)
SEC Charges KPMG and Four KPMG Partners with Fraud in Connection with Audits of Xerox
SEC Seeks Injunction, Disgorgement and Penalties
On January 29, 2003, the Securities and Exchange Commission filed a civil fraud injunctive action in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York against KPMG LLP and four KPMG partners - including the head of the firm's department of professional practice - in connection with KPMG's audits of Xerox Corporation from 1997 through 2000. The complaint charges the firm and four partners with fraud, and seeks injunctions, disgorgement of all fees and civil money penalties.
The complaint alleges that KPMG and its partners permitted Xerox to manipulate its accounting practices to close a $3 billion "gap" between actual operating results and results reported to the investing public. Year after year, the defendants falsely represented to the public that their audits were conducted in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards (GAAS) and that Xerox's financial reports fairly represented the company's financial condition and were prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).
The four partners named as defendants, all of whom are certified public accountants, are:
The Commission's complaint alleges that beginning at least as early as 1997, Xerox initiated or increased reliance on various accounting devices to manipulate its equipment revenues and earnings. Most of these "topside accounting devices" violated GAAP and most improperly increased the amount of equipment revenue from leased office equipment products which Xerox recognized in its quarterly and annual financial statements filed with the Commission and distributed to investors and the public. This improper revenue recognition had the effect of inflating equipment revenues and earnings beyond what actual operating results warranted. In addition, the complaint alleges that the defendants fraudulently permitted Xerox to manipulate reserves to boost the company's earnings.
The complaint alleges that under GAAP, when lessors such as Xerox enter into a "sales type lease" they must recognize immediately nearly all of the revenue attributed to the value of the product, but must spread recognition of financing, servicing and supply revenues over the life of the lease. Traditionally, Xerox local offices in each country booked the value of leased products at the time a lease was entered into, accounting also for the cost of financing and servicing the equipment during the lease period, based on local market conditions. Beginning in at least 1997, Xerox altered its accounting to treat more finance and servicing revenue as part of the value of the equipment, allowing Xerox to recognize a greater portion of revenue from new leases immediately in its financial statements. These calculations were made either by management at Stamford or by local country managers based on explicit assumptions dictated by Stamford, which ignored local economic conditions. The complaint refers to these new methods as "topside accounting devices" imposed by senior Xerox financial managers. Xerox told KPMG it needed to resort to these improper accounting devices because it could no longer rely on the traditional way it established the fair value of its products.
Although adoption of these new methods made Xerox revenue and earnings reports not comparable to earlier periods, and resulted in less revenue and earnings for reporting in future periods, Xerox never informed the public of the changes.
According to the complaint, KPMG affiliate offices in Europe, Brazil, Canada and Japan, as well as KPMG auditors at Xerox's main U.S. operations facility in Rochester, N.Y., repeatedly warned the defendant KPMG partners, who had overall responsibility for the Xerox audit engagement, that manipulative actions taken by Xerox to improve revenues and earnings were unnecessary, were not adequately tested, and distorted true business results. The defendant KPMG partners, who worked near Xerox headquarters in Stamford, Connecticut or at KPMG's New York headquarters, gave little weight to these warnings from on-the-scene KPMG affiliates and did not demand that Xerox justify the reasons for departures from historic accounting methods or establish the accuracy of the new, manipulative practices.
The warnings provided to the defendant KPMG partners from KPMG affiliate offices included the following:
Although the defendants occasionally voiced concern to Xerox management about the "topside accounting devices" developed and manipulated by senior corporate financial managers to increase revenue and earnings, the defendants did little or nothing when Xerox ignored their concerns and continued manipulating its financial results. The defendants then knowingly or recklessly set aside their reservations, failed in their professional duties as auditors, and gave a clean bill of health to Xerox's financial statements. Rather than put at risk a lucrative financial relationship with a premier client, the defendants failed to challenge Xerox's improper accounting actions and make the company accurately report its financial results.
After this fraudulent conduct was investigated and exposed, Xerox, employing a new auditor, issued a $6.1 billion restatement of its equipment revenues and a $1.9 billion restatement of its pre-tax earnings for the years 1997 through 2000. The Commission's complaint alleges that the defendants' fraudulent conduct allowed Xerox to inflate equipment revenues by approximately $3 billion and inflate pre-tax earnings by approximately $1.2 billion in the company's 1997 through 2000 financial results.
The Complaint alleges that each defendant violated Section 17(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 and Sections 10(b) and 10A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (Exchange Act) and Exchange Act Rule 10b-5, and aided and abetted violations of Sections 13(a), 13(b)(2)(A) and 13(b)(2)(B) of the Exchange Act, and Exchange Act Rules 13a-1, 13a-13, 12b-20 and 13b2-1.
On April 11, 2002, the Commission brought an injunctive action against Xerox based on the same allegations of accounting fraud as are alleged against the KPMG defendants, as well as other allegations. Without admitting or denying the allegations of the complaint, Xerox consented to the entry of a Final Judgment that permanently enjoined the company from violating the antifraud, reporting and record keeping provisions of the federal securities laws. Xerox also paid a $10 million civil penalty, agreed to restate its financial statements and agreed to hire a consultant to review the company's internal accounting controls and policies. Securities and Exchange Commission v. Xerox Corporation, Civil Action No. 02-CV-2780 (DLC) (S.D.N.Y.) (April 11, 2002). See Litigation Release No. 17465 / April 11, 2002 / Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Release No. 1542 / April 11, 2002.
The SEC is continuing its investigation of this matter.
SEC Complaint in this matter
 
http://www.sec.gov/litigation/litreleases/lr17954.htm
