LITIGATION RELEASE NO. 17577 / June 21, 2002 ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING ENFORCEMENT RELEASE NO. 1581 / June 21, 2002 SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION V. FRANK M. BERGONZI, MARTIN L. GRASS, AND FRANKLIN C. BROWN, 1:CV02-1084 (M.D.Pa.)
ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING ENFORCEMENT RELEASE NO. 1581 / June 21, 2002
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION V. FRANK M. BERGONZI, MARTIN L. GRASS, AND FRANKLIN C. BROWN, 1:CV02-1084 (M.D.Pa.)
RITE AID'S FORMER MANAGEMENT TEAM CHARGED WITH SECURITIES FRAUD BY SEC
The Securities and Exchange Commission announced today that it filed accounting fraud charges in federal district court in the Middle District of Pennsylvania against three former senior executives of Rite Aid Corporation, the nationwide drug store chain based in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. The United States Attorney for the Middle District of Pennsylvania simultaneously announced related criminal charges.
The Commission also announced today that it instituted separate settled cease-and-desist proceedings against Rite Aid and its former president and COO Timothy J. Noonan.
In the civil action, the Commission charged that Martin L. Grass, Rite Aid's former long-time CEO, Frank M. Bergonzi, the drug chain's former CFO, and Franklin C. Brown, the former vice chairman and chief legal officer, were responsible for one of the most egregious accounting frauds in recent history. The Commission also charged Grass and Brown with concealing certain related party transactions that enriched Grass at shareholder expense, and charged Grass with fabricating Board committee minutes in order to support a lie he told in connection with obtaining a loan critical to keeping Rite Aid in business.
The Commission alleges that Grass, Bergonzi, and Brown conducted a wide-ranging accounting fraud scheme that resulted in the significant inflation of Rite Aid's net income in every quarter from May 1997 to May 1999. After the discovery of improper and unsubstantiated accounting transactions, in July and October 2000 Rite Aid restated cumulative pretax income by a massive $2.3 billion dollars and cumulative net income by $1.6 billion dollars. Rite Aid's restatement was, and to this day is, by far the largest financial restatement ever by a public company. The Commission's subsequent investigation of the reasons for this massive restatement resulted in the current charges against the company and its former top managers.
The Commission is seeking permanent injunctions prohibiting violations of the antifraud, reporting, books and records, internal controls, and other provisions of the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; civil money penalties; bars against acting as officers and directors of public companies; and disgorgement of ill-gotten gains, including performance-based bonuses.
The Commission's Complaint alleges as follows:
Summary

The Accounting Fraud
Vendor-Related Accounting Irregularities
Other Major Areas of Accounting Irregularities
Fraud Relating to Concealed Related Party Transactions Benefiting Grass
Fraud Relating to Stock Pledge and Grass's Fabrication of Minutes
Specifically, the Commission has charged all Defendants with violations of Section 17(a) of the Securities Act, Sections 10(b) and 13(b)(5) of the Exchange Act, and Rules 10b-5, 13b2-1, and 13b2-2 thereunder, and as controlling persons of Rite Aid pursuant to Section 20(a) of the Exchange Act, Sections 13(a) and 13(b)(2) of the Exchange Act and Rules 12b-20 and 13a-1 thereunder; Bergonzi, as a controlling person, with violations of Rule 13a-13 under the Exchange Act; and Grass and Brown, as controlling persons, with violations of Section 14(a) of the Exchange Act and Rules 14a-9(a) and Rule 13a-11 thereunder.
The Commission also instituted separate settled cease-and-desist proceedings against Rite Aid and its former president and COO Timothy J. Noonan. The Commission considered Rite Aid's and Noonan's cooperation during the investigation in determining the appropriate resolution of the proceedings against them
Rite Aid agreed to settle the action against it by consenting to a cease-and-desist order prohibiting it from committing or causing violations of Sections 13(a) and 13(b)(2) of the Exchange Act and Rules 12b-20, 13a-1 and 13a-13 thereunder, the reporting, books and records, and internal controls provisions. Rite Aid also agreed to cooperate with the Commission during any future judicial proceedings.
Noonan agreed to settle the action against him by consenting to a cease-and-desist order prohibiting him from committing or causing violations of Section 10(b) of the Exchange Act and Rule 10b-5 thereunder, the antifraud provisions of the Exchange Act, and from causing violations of Sections 13(a) and 13(b)(2) of the Exchange Act and Rules 12b-20, 13a-1 and 13a-13 thereunder, the reporting, books and records, and internal controls provisions.
* * *
The Commission acknowledges the assistance of the United States Attorney's Office for the Middle District of Pennsylvania in the investigation of this matter.
