U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Litigation Release No. 18985 / November 30, 2004
Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Release No. 2145 / November 30, 2004
Securities and Exchange Commission v. American International Group, Inc., Civil Action No. 1:04CV02070 (GK)(D.D.C. filed November 30, 2004)
AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL GROUP, INC. AGREES TO SETTLE CHARGES OF VIOLATIONS OF ANTIFRAUD AND OTHER PROVISIONS OF THE FEDERAL SECURITIES LAWS
The Securities and Exchange Commission ("Commission") today filed a civil action against American International Group, Inc. ("Defendant AIG") for violating antifraud provisions of the federal securities laws and for aiding and abetting violations of reporting and record-keeping provisions of those laws. The Commission's action arises out of the conduct of Defendant AIG, primarily through its wholly owned subsidiary AIG Financial Products Corp. ("AIG-FP"), (collectively referred to as "AIG") in developing, marketing, and entering into transactions that purported to enable a public company to remove certain assets from its balance sheet. Defendant AIG, without admitting or denying the allegations in the Commission's Complaint has consented to the issuance of a final judgment (1) permanently enjoining it from violating, and from aiding and abetting violations of, certain provisions of the federal securities laws, (2) ordering it to comply with its undertaking to retain an independent consultant to examine certain prior transactions and to establish a transaction review committee to review future transactions, and (3) ordering Defendant AIG to disgorge the amount of fees that it received. In consenting to settle the Commission's action and related, criminal charges, AIG has agreed to pay disgorgement, plus prejudgment interest, and penalties totaling $126,366,000.
In its Complaint, filed in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, the Commission alleged that from at least March 2001 through January 2002, Defendant AIG, primarily through AIG-FP, developed a product called a Contributed Guaranteed Alternative Investment Trust Security ("C-GAITS"), marketed that product to several public companies, and ultimately entered into three C-GAITS transactions with one such company, The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc. ("PNC"). For a fee, AIG offered to establish a special purpose entity ("SPE") to which the counter-party would transfer troubled or other potentially volatile assets. AIG represented that, under generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"), the SPE would not be consolidated on the counter-party's financial statements. The counter-party thus would be able to avoid charges to its income statement resulting from declines in the value of the assets transferred to the SPE. The transaction that AIG developed and marketed, however, did not satisfy the requirements of GAAP for nonconsolidation of SPEs.
The Commission alleged that while AIG was marketing the product, independent auditors for some potential counter-parties raised issues about whether certain features of the C-GAITS product could cause the product not to satisfy the GAAP requirements for nonconsolidation of SPEs. AIG did not inform the other potential counter-parties of these issues, except in one instance in which a potential counter-party used the same independent auditor as the potential counter-party that had communicated the issue to AIG. The Commission further alleged that AIG entered into three C-GAITS transactions with PNC to enable PNC to remove a total of $762 million in loan and venture-capital assets from its balance sheet. AIG was reckless in not knowing that these transactions did not satisfy the GAAP requirements for nonconsolidation of the assets by PNC.
In its Complaint, the Commission alleged the following:
The Commission further alleged in its Complaint that Defendant AIG (a) recklessly made misstatements of material facts, and omitted to state material facts, about whether the C-GAITS product satisfied the GAAP requirements for nonconsolidation of an SPE and (b) entered into the three PAGIC transactions with PNC that it was reckless in not knowing did not satisfy the GAAP requirements for nonconsolidation of the SPEs by PNC.
Defendant AIG, without admitting or denying the allegations in the Complaint, has consented to the issuance of a final judgment (a) permanently enjoining it from violating of Section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 ("Exchange Act"), Exchange Act Rule 10b-5, and Section 17(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 and from aiding and abetting violations of Sections 13(a) and 13(b)(2)(A) of the Exchange Act and Exchange Act Rules 12b-1, 13a-1, and 13a-13, (b) ordering it to disgorge the $39,821,000 in fees that it received, plus prejudgment interest of $6,545,000, which will be paid to the victim restitution fund established in connection with the prior resolution of criminal charges by the Department of Justice against a PNC subsidiary and (c) ordering Defendant AIG to retain an independent consultant to examine certain of its prior transactions and to establish a Transaction Review Committee to review the appropriateness of certain future transactions. The independent consultant will conduct an examination of transactions that Defendant AIG entered into with a public company between January 1, 2000 and the date of the final judgment that involved the use of SPEs or variable interest entities, or that were marketed or entered into by Defendant AIG with a primary purpose of enabling a public company to obtain an accounting or financial reporting result. The Transaction Review Committee will review transactions proposed to be undertaken with a public company that were or are developed, marketed, or proposed by Defenant AIG or a public company and that involve heightened legal, reputational, or regulatory risk, including transactions with a primary purpose of enabling a public company to obtain an accounting or financial result. The independent consultant will conduct a review related to certain policies and procedures adopted by the Transactional Review Committee.
Separately today, the Fraud Section of the Criminal Division of the Department of Justice ("Fraud Section") announced a resolution of related, criminal charges against Defendant AIG and two of its subsidiaries. In resolving the civil and criminal charges, AIG has agreed to pay disgorgement and penalties totaling $126 million. Today's civil and criminal actions are the result of investigations by the Commission, the Fraud Section, and the Pittsburgh office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The Commission previously brought a prior settled proceeding against PNC. For further information See In the Matter of The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc., Securities Act Release No. 33-8112, Exchange Act Release No. 34-46225, July 18, 2002. The Commission's investigation is continuing as to the conduct of others.
SEC Complaint in this matter
http://www.sec.gov/litigation/litreleases/lr18985.htm
